+++
title = """Linux Command Line Aliases for Local LLMs with llama.cpp."""
date = 2024-11-16T15:02:05.000Z
tags = ["reddit","cli"]
+++
As a user of llama.cpp, I have llamas all over my Linux machine. All local residents, in all LLM flavours. I use them in several ways:

1.  I chat with them in the browser via the (llama.cpp) llama-server or a llamafile server.
    
2.  I speak to them (and they respond both in speech and textually) using just a key press in any Linux desktop application (using the lean and mean [BlahST](https://github.com/QuantiusBenignus/BlahST))
    
3.  Last but not least, I call on their one-shot help from the command line via command-line aliases, formated like this: `gemma "Some request"`, or `qwen "Some question"` ,etc. A couple of examples: \`\`\` ➜ ~ echo "${$(gemma "A cow in ASCII art.")/\[end of text\]}"
    
        (__) (oo) 
    
    /------/ / | ||
    
4.  /---/\\ ~~ ~~ ...."Have you mooed today?"... `or` ➜ ~ qwen "Why is the slash also solidus?" The term "solidus" is indeed another name for the slash (/) character. The term comes from typography and has its roots in ancient manuscripts and early printing. Originally, a solidus was a line used in medieval manuscripts to separate numbers or words, much like the modern slash. In modern usage, the term "solidus" is less common and is generally replaced by "slash" in everyday language. However, it is still used in certain contexts, such as in typography, computing, and in specific technical or historical discussions.
    

The term "solidus" can also refer to the currency symbol for the Italian lira and the Maltese lira, which is a slash through the letter "L" (₤). However, in the context of the character used in text, it specifically refers to the forward slash (/). \[end of text\] \`\`\` I think it is not surprising that, given that LLMs are mostly spitting out text , I find myself using them predominantly from the command line with aliases. So this post is about those command-line aliases and specifically, my tips for making aliases for models that require direct system promt like the Qwen 2.5 models (which seem to punch way above their "weights" and have become favorites to many).

In zsh they (the aliases, which are typically defined in the user's .zshrc) might look like this: `alias gemma='llama-cli -t 8 -c 8192 --temp 0 2>/dev/null -ngl 99 -co -mli --no-display-prompt -m ~/PATH-TO-YOUR/Models/gemma-2-9b-it-Q6_K_L.gguf --prompt'`

so that a call `gemma "Some prompt"` would work, since the next argument "Some prompt" is the expected user prompt.

The problem with qwen 2.5 (Instruct - this is all about Instruct models) is that it requires (just like most LLama models and others) an explicit, well-formed system prompt even for one-off, one-shot calls from the command line, so a simple alias that uses the --prompt flag for the system prompt would need to somehow append to that the user part of the prompt. In other words the alias needs a parameter. In bash and zsh this can be accomplished with functions, while zsh allows a clever alias construction using an anonymous function. This is my alias for calling qwen 2.5 from the zsh command line (I have removed some system specific and personal preference flags):

`alias qwen='() { llama-cli -t 8 -c 4096 --temp 0 2>/dev/null -ngl 99 -co -mli --no-display-prompt -m ~/PATH-TO-YOUR/Models/Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct-Q5_K_L.gguf --prompt "<|im_start|>system\nYou are Qwen, created by Alibaba Cloud. You are a helpful assistant.<|im_end|>\n<|im_start|>user\n$1<|im_end|>\n<|im_start|>assistant\n" ; }'`

Note the use of the `$1` parameter in the anonymous function. Substituted by the user part of the prompt ("Why is the slash also solidus?" in the above example). With this alias, on a command-line call `qwen "Some prompt"` the model should answer and stop properly without going into a repetition loop.

So this is my little ( probably trivial for readers of this sub) tip for people who want to LLM-augment their Linux command line in a simple way using (zsh) aliases that require parameters. Of course, defining user functions or even writing whole scripts and placing them in the $PATH is always an option.

submitted by [/u/QuantuisBenignus](https://www.reddit.com/user/QuantuisBenignus)  
[\[link\]](https://www.reddit.com/r/commandline/comments/1gsp34q/linux_command_line_aliases_for_local_llms_with/) [\[comments\]](https://www.reddit.com/r/commandline/comments/1gsp34q/linux_command_line_aliases_for_local_llms_with/)

[[source]](https://www.reddit.com/r/commandline/comments/1gsp34q/linux_command_line_aliases_for_local_llms_with/)
